WENTWORTH INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
ELECTROMECHANICAL ENGINEERING
FINAL REPORT
Kinesthetic feedback device for realizing boundary
contact through a virtual environment
Authors:
Andrew ZUCKER1∗
Owen MEDEIROS2∗
Jared TALAMINI3
Supervisor:
Dr. James MCCUSKER
April 24, 2019
1azucker55@gmail.com 2medeirosowen@gmail.com 3jaredtalamini@gmail.com
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Virtual reality is growing rapidly and has demonstrated uses in the fields of rehabilitation, profes-
sional training, education, research, and recreation, thanks to its immersive quality. Virtual reality is
able to stimulate audio and visual senses, but touch remains largely underdeveloped. We present a
bi-directional slot mechanism that actively limits the range of motion (ROM) of a user’s lower arm, but
does not affect motion within these limits. By controlling these limits, the device provides kinesthetic
feedback to simulate virtual interactions without additional impedance to the user’s movement. These
interactions are fostered using HTC VIVE tracking components and BLDC actuators. In developing
such a device, we have laid the framework for other single degree of freedom joints and provided initial
steps towards the design of a fully immersive experience.
Contents
1 Problem Definition 1
2 Background research 1
2.1 Kinematics . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
2.1.1 Euler Angles . . . . . . . 1
2.1.2 Rotation Matrices . . . . . 2
2.1.3 Quaternions . . . . . . . . 2
2.2 2.4 2.5 Virtual Tracking . . . . . . . . . . 3
2.3 Brushless DC Motors . . . . . . . 4
Velocity Control . . . . . . . . . . 4
Encoders . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.6 Hardware Communication . . . . 5
2.7 Virtual Rendering Engines . . . . 5
10 Appendix 20
10.1 Software Architecture . . . . . . . 10.2 Sensor Test . . . . . . . . . . . . 10.3 Gantt Chart . . . . . . . . . . . . 10.4 BOM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
25
28
31
3 Objectives 6
4 Design 7
4.1 Mechanical . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
4.1.1 Bi-directional slot mecha-
nism . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
4.1.2 Device packaging . . . . . 7
4.2 Electrical . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
4.2.1 Motor selection . . . . . . 8
4.2.2 Interaction control . . . . 9
4.2.3 Communications . . . . . 9
4.3 Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.3.1 Virtual tracking . . . . . . 10
4.3.2 Virtual environment . . . 10
5 Methods 11
5.1 5.2 Mechanical . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Electrical . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
5.2.1 Printed Circuit Boards . . 13
5.2.2 Hardware . . . . . . . . . 14
5.3 Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
5.3.1 Virtual tracking . . . . . . 14
5.3.2 Virtual environment . . . 15
5.3.3 ODrive . . . . . . . . . . 16
6 Evaluation 17
7 Future work 18
8 Conclusion 19
9 References 19
1 Problem Definition
Since its inception in 1968, virtual reality (VR) has demonstrated an ability to surround the user with
virtual information [1]. Virtual settings provide great opportunity in the fields of rehabilitation [2, 3],
professional training [4, 5], recreation [6], and education [7]. The quality of immersion directly relates to
the realism of the application [5]. Immersive virtual settings have been achieved by stimulating the user’s
audio and visual senses, but touch has been largely underdeveloped. Tactile devices that simulate textures,
vibrations, and contact interactions provide a sense of immersion [8–13]. However, devices that enable
large scale interactions have not been achieved. By developing devices that enable large scale interaction,
the next steps in achieving a high-fidelity immersive experience can be realized.
2 Background research
In the pursuit of developing a high-fidelity immersive experience, initial research was conducted into
physical human robot interaction (pHRI). A review by Losey et al discusses the advances of pHRI and its
development in areas like telerobotics, exoskeletons, and robotic limbs for amputees [14]. Here, the intent
of these devices is to improve the user’s strength and endurance and such designs are directly coupled to
the joints of a user. In coupling to a joint, external control or detection of the user’s intent is necessary for
actuating a limb, and this disqualifies the devices as immersive. This inability to move the joint without
applying a force to the control device is a term we define as position lock; it is the main obstacle for a
high-fidelity immersive device. To create such a device, experience and background knowledge is needed
in a wide breadth of technical areas. In this section, the basic understanding needed for the development
of an immersive device is outlined.
2.1 Kinematics
To avoid position lock, an understanding of human kinematic modeling is required. The body can be
modeled using single, two, or three degree of freedom joints. Modeling the motion of these joints requires
mathematical understanding of spatial translations and rotations. Spatial translations are straight forward
compared to spatial rotations which can be accomplished using two methods.
2.1.1 Euler Angles
In the first method, axial rotations are defined by Euler angles offset from a global coordinate system [15].
This method is limited by gimbal lock, a scenario where the rotation of two axes are aligned and a degree
of freedom is compromised. A graphical representation of gimbal lock is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Gimbal schematic representing free rotation and gimbal lock. Left: Three freely rotating axes
within Euclidean space. Right: Two axes aligned, reducing rotational degrees of freedom, defined as
gimbal lock.
1
2.1.2 Rotation Matrices
In the second method, linear algebra is utilized to perform rotations in Euclidean space. A general rotation
matrix is defined as orthagonal with determinant 1. To perform a basic rotation about the x, y, or z axis,
the following matrices can be applied to a coordinate system.
Rx(α) =   
1 0 0
0 cos (α)−sin (α)
0 sin (α) cos (α)
   (1)
Ry(β) =   
cos (β) 0 sin (β)
0 1 0
−sin (β) 0 cos (β)
   (2)
Rz(γ) =   
cos (γ)−sin (γ) 0
sin (γ) cos (γ) 0
0 0 1
   (3)
Performing multiple rotations is as simple as multiplying more matrices, resulting in a combined ma-
trix. Although, rotation matrix multiplication is non-commutative, and matrices must be multiplied in the
correct order to achieve the desired rotation.
2.1.3 Quaternions
In the third method, quaternion rotation defines a spatial rotation by a vector and a rotation about that
vector. Quaternions extend the complex number system to three dimensions and include a rotation scalar,
forming a four dimensional vector [16]. Operating in four dimensions allows for three dimensional rota-
tions to be performed without gimbal lock. The definition of a quaternion can be seen in Equation 4 where
θis the angle of rotation and uxi + uyj + uzk is the unit rotation vector v.
θ
q= e
2 (uxi+uyj+uzk) (4)
θ
= cos
2 + (ux i + uyj + uzk) sin θ
2 (5)
= w+ xi + yj + zk (6)
In order to multiply two quaternions together, it must be noted that the method is noncommutative. Using
quaternion mathematics, an indefinite series of rotations can be converted into a single rotation about an
axis. To perform a rotation on a vector p, one must consider the vector p to be a quaternion with a rotation
component equal to zero. Let p be an arbitrary vector that is to be later rotated by q:
p= pxi + pyj + pzk
The rotation of p about q is achieved by conjugating p by q, by using the Hamilton product.
p′
= qpq−1 (7)
This rotation method can be applied to multiple degrees using p′as the new vector to be rotated by another
quaternion.
2
2.2 Virtual Tracking
Accurately and precisely tracking an object’s movement is the foundation of interacting with a virtual
environment. To understand how an audio-visual platform determines the relative position of the user, we
focused on the theory employed by the HTC VIVE. The VIVE components rely on infrared (IR) photo-
diodes and base stations. The base stations produce IR laser plane sweeps that cause the photo-diodes to
assert their output low, shown in Figure 2. The timing of the output pulse train encodes the position of the
sensor relative to the base stations [17].
Figure 2: Depiction of HTC VIVE IR light laser plane sweeps. One of two base stations are shown in the
upper left corner and the black circle represents the photo-diode sensor. The vertical and horizontal plane
sweeps are shown in transparent red and blue, respectively. The vector N is normal to the face of the base
station and the azimuthal offset ψis shown while the polar offset φis zero.
The timing of the sweep pulse indicates the angular offset from the base stations’ normal vector, N, which
is determined from the room setup. The angular offset is calculated from the difference pulse time, tand
the center of the sweep 4000µs, divided by the total sweep time.
π(t−4000)
θ=
8333 (8)
The angular offsets are referred to as the polar (φ) and azimuthal (ψ) angles. With these angles, a local
unit vector corresponding to the location of the sensor can be produced.
ˆ
i= sin φcos ψ (9)
ˆ
j = cos φ (10)
ˆ
k= sin φsin ψ (11)
Pl = ⟨ˆ
i1,
ˆ
j1,
ˆ
k1⟩ Ql = ⟨ˆ
i2,
ˆ
j2,
ˆ
k2⟩
Multiplying local unit vectors Pl and Ql by the respective base station’s rotation matrix converts the unit
vectors to global coordinates. Using these global unit vectors and the base stations’ positions, P0 and Q0,
a line from the base stations to the sensor, P(s) and Q(t) can be formed.
Pg = M1P (12)
Qg = M2Q (13)
P(s) = P0 + sPg Q(t) = Q0 + tQg Solving the intersection of the two lines provides the complete location of the sensor.
3
(14)
(15)
2.3 Brushless DC Motors
Brushless DC (BLDC) motors are permanent magnet 3-phase motors that utilize an air gap to complete
a magnetic field from the stator to the rotor. Each phase within a BLDC motor has a specific phase
inductance and resistance. Understanding this impedance allows the motor controller to utilize back-EMF
voltage for feedback. Two important parameters in motor selection are the velocity constant, Kv, whose
units are radians per Volt-second,
ωnoLoad
Kv =
,rad[Vs]−1 (16)
VPeak
and the torque constant, Kτ, whose units are Newton-meters per Ampere.
60
Kτ
=
,NmA−1 (17)
2π·Kv
These constants are instrumental in selecting a motor that will both have enough speed and torque for an
application. The torque constant is derived from the velocity constant, which is given by the manufacturer
of the motor. A BLDC motor is operated by applying a PWM signal to an electronic speed controller
(ESC) that generates a 3-phase sinusoid signal as an output to the motor. ESC’s normally operate on
open loop control where speed is proportional to PWM pulsewidth. A closed loop signal can provide
feedback about the motor to improve its performance. An example of closed loop control is field oriented
control (FOC) which monitors motor phase currents to generate more precise and efficient commutation.
FOC uses current sensing to dynamically control the current vector, shown as a grey vector on the left
side of Figure 3, and is produced by the magnetic field. The output of the control loops that manipulate
the current vector components drives a PWM controller that in turn adjusts the induced magnetic field.
Another example of closed loop control is with an encoder, where angular ticks are counted as a parameter
to measure the position of the rotor. Encoders are discussed further in Section 2.5.
PI
0
Regulator
PWM Controller
PI
Desired Torque
Regulator
-
-
Iq
Id
Figure 3: The torque vector components are depicted by the yellow arrow, Iq, and the green arrow, Id. The
vectors are shown as the feedback to two PI regulators. These vectors are shown radiating from the rotor.
The stator is shown as three coils on the right side of the figure.
2.4 Velocity Control
A useful method for commutating BLDCs in a smooth manner is trapezoidal velocity control. This method
directly measures an angular velocity that the motor is moving at, and controls this value with a series of
4
linear interpolations. As a result, the movement is equivalent to the integral of these interpolations. At
spin-up and spin-down, the motor’s position experiences x2 change in position, and during movement in
between these limits, a constant-linear movement. This relationship can be seen in Figure 4.
Position
Max Velocity
Time
Figure 4: The blue line represents the trapezoidal velocity curve, while the red line represents the piece-
wise polynomial position curve. The units of velocity are encoder counts per second.
2.5 Encoders
Measuring the rotational position of a motor is necessary for any closed loop design. In order to accurately
track the angular position of a motor, an encoder or hall effect sensor can be used. There are two main
types of encoder architectures, incremental and absolute. The visual difference between the two can be
seen in Figure 5. Encoders can read the encoder disc in many different ways, of the most common are
optical, capacitive, and magnetic. Optical encoders use a transparent disc with opaque ticks and a photo
diode to detect position. Capacitive encoders use a high frequency signal and measure a modulated change
as the capacitive disc rotates, then on board electronics convert this signal into rotary pulses. Magnetic
encoders work similarly to optical encoders but at a lower resolution due to the size of the alternating
magnetic field areas. Incremental encoders utilize an index that determines relative position from a starting
index (requiring a homing sequence), while absolute encoders show a unique index at every position.
Incremental encoders are typically of a quadrature structure, meaning that the output has two channels
reading the encoder disc. The two channels in the quadrature encoder are offset in phase, giving four
readings per encoder tick. Hall effect sensors output a voltage proportional to a change in magnetic field
[18], and this is used to track when a motor phase is being powered. These have less resolution than an
encoder because the hall effect sensor is limited by the number of poles in the motor.
2.6 Hardware Communication
A common form of communication from computer to microcontroller is serial communication. This
communication protocol sends one byte at a time at a given transmission rate known as the baud rate.
The baud rate is the formal name given to the rate at which symbols are transferred over the connection.
A symbol is any signaling event, such as the change from 0 to 1 in binary. In digital systems such as a
microcontroller, the baud rate is equivalent to bits per second. Typically, the baud rate ranges from 9600
to 115200 baud.
2.7 Virtual Rendering Engines
Foremost in every VR experience is the computer generated environment. A popular platform for develop-
ing both 2D and 3D environments is the Unity engine. Unity can be used in conjunction with VR devices
such as the HTC VIVE to create virtual environments. It accepts scripting in the complete languages of C#
5
Figure 5: On the left figure, the index on the incremental encoder can be seen. The right figure shows an
absolute encoder with a unique representation at every position. Reprinted from: [19]
or Java in order to add capability to objects within the game. With scripts, all parameters of an object can
be controlled, such as position, weight, or color. The engine is capable of communicating with external
devices through USB, COM ports, and TCP/IP networks, which is useful for integrating hardware.
3 Objectives
With the intent of designing a high-fidelity immersive experience, the primary objective is to create a non-
invasive wearable device that provides immersive, kinesthetic feedback to a user. Creating such a device
that encapsulates the user’s entire body is ideal but is a herculean undertaking. In this work, we will be
focused on providing mechanical feedback to a simple, single degree of freedom joint. The closest single
degree of freedom joint to current virtual manipulators is the elbow.
In order to qualify high-fidelity immersion, the following specifications must be achieved.
1. The device shall dynamically limit the user’s ROM without impeding the user’s desire to move
within this range (position lock).
2. The virtual representation of the arm will produce a usable parameter for the positioning of the
motors with respect to virtual objects.
3. The device shall only limit the user’s ROM when in contact with a virtual object.
4. The device shall simulate contact within the resolution of human anthropometry [20].
5. In order to simulate a stiff surface, the equivalent spring constant of the device should fall within
283 ±132 Ncm−1 [20].
6. The device should be capable of actuating up to 10 pounds.
The design requirements focus on the underlying needs to generate immersion and provide metrics that
would be useful in forceful applications.
6
4 Design
Developing a high fidelity immersive device combines mechanical, electrical, and software control sys-
tems. The quality of this device is dependent on the design of each system and how they are able to
engage with one another. In this section, we describe how position lock is overcome, how the actuators are
controlled, how the device is packaged as a wearable device, and how the virtual environment is created.
4.1 Mechanical
In this section, we describe the considerations made in the mechanical design. Here, we address the
problem of position lock and how the device will later be packaged on a user. These details provide a
foundation for device manufacturing, as discussed in Section 5.
4.1.1 Bi-directional slot mechanism
The component that limits a user’s ROM is the bi-directional slot mechanism. This mechanism must be
designed such that it can be easily worn by a user. A rehabilitative arm brace provides an ergonomic
solution in which to affix the other components of the device. This mechanism overcomes position lock
and consists of two independent discs, each of which control one end point in a user’s range of motion.
This effect is outlined in Figure 6. The discs are concentric about the elbow’s axis of rotation and the slot
in each disc aligns with a pin that is affixed to the lower portion of the arm brace. The slot is designed to
allow the pin to travel freely through a 170◦arc. This ensures that the disc will not impede the user as they
move their lower arm through their natural range of motion of 150◦[21]. By rotating this slot, the ROM
can be adjusted, thus simulating contact while eliminating the concern of position lock.
Figure 6: An exploded view of the bi-directional slot mechanism is depicted. Each disc is mounted
concentrically about the axis of rotation, i.e. the elbow joint. The pin is fixed to the lower arm. The discs
are able to rotate in either direction to constrain the range of motion of the pin.
4.1.2 Device packaging
The design of a bi-directional slot mechanism requires many electromechanical components. Configuring
these components in an ergonomic package is non-trivial. The focus of our design is to mount each
component as close to the shoulder as possible. This reduces the moment caused by each component.
As mentioned, the base of this design is a modified rehabilitative arm brace. It is upon this brace that
7
Figure 7: An exploded view of the device is depicted. From left to right: arm brace, VIVE Tracker,
bi-directional slot mechanism, electronics mount, and actuator mount.
the remaining components are mounted. The upper most strap was chosen as the dedicated mounting
location for the micro-controllers. A multi-purpose mounting structure was designed to house the motor
controller, tracking sensors, and shields the user from moving parts. This mounting structure was stylized
to accentuate the user’s arm contour while providing increased visibility of the IR tracking sensors to
the base stations and discrete mounting locations for other components. Following the same criteria for
ergonomics and a low-profile design, the lower sensor cover was designed with similar features to the
multi-purpose mounting structure. The lower sensor cover extends past the bi-directional slot mechanism
to locate wiring harnesses away from the moving parts. A motor mount was designed to install directly
on top of the multi-purpose mounting structure and to space the motors within millimeters of the arm
brace. The motor mount provides mounting locations for an IR tracking sensor, two encoders, and two
motors. Altogether, the designed packaging safely houses all necessary components for the bi-directional
slot mechanism, as shown exploded in Figure 7.
4.2 Electrical
The bi-directional slot mechanism provides a unique solution for overcoming position lock. This solution
remains incomplete without the ability to actuate each disc. In this section, the actuator design and the
methods that define the conversion of virtual information to physical sensation are discussed.
4.2.1 Motor selection
The most practical way to actuate the discs is through the use of a motor. With a myriad of motor specifi-
cations, selecting a motor is a critical step in the design process. Considering a wearable device, the size
and weight are the highest priorities for motor specifications. Large motors that project perpendicularly
from a user’s arm create a noticeable imbalance and this decreases comfort due to the fluidity of the skin.
In addition to concerns of comfort, reducing the device’s response time is dependent on the motor’s angular
velocity. The speed at which the motor can control the range of motion and the user’s lower arm position
needs to achieve an average of at least 25.6 rads−1 [22]. Considering the design constraints, a BLDC
motor (GARTT ML 5215 340KV) was selected.
Having selected a motor, controlling the torque and position is required for creating force feedback in a
virtual environment. While velocity-based feedback controllers are available for high-speed applications,
this control method is not suited for high-precision position control. To allow for position control, a motor
8
controller (ODrive v3.6) was chosen due to its high level of control over all parameters of up to two motors.
A single ODrive can control up to two motors with closed loop feedback, and measures all parameters of
the motors to be known and edited, thus fulfilling all of the needs for a motor controller for two actuators
in a single package. The controller is configured using a Python library and actuates the BLDC motors
using data from the virtual environment.
4.2.2 Interaction control
Within a virtual environment, the user is engulfed by audio and visual information. This information is
only useful if it can be used to rotate the bi-directional slot mechanism to simulate the sensation of contact
with virtual objects. To simulate objects, it is necessary to understand the kinematic state of the arm
relative to the virtual environment. By understanding the relationship between the virtual environment
and the arm, the discs are adjusted to control the ROM. At the limits of the ROM, the interaction between
the lower arm pin and the bi-directional slot mechanism can provide additional information about the
object. An example of an interaction is shown in Figure 8. These methods outline how the device can
provide physical feedback from a virtual environment.
Figure 8: The virtual representation of the upper arm is depicted in solid red lines and the lower arm is
solid yellow lines. The blue and green blocks represent two virtual objects. Interactions with the blocks
by rotating the elbow are depicted by dotted yellow lines.
4.2.3 Communications
The data gathered from a virtual environment must be communicated to the the user. This data needs to
be transmitted to the actuators in the form of encoder counts. The overall data flow consists of encoder
counts calculated in Unity, to a microcontroller, and finally from a microcontroller to the ODrive motor
controller. In Unity, external communication can be accomplished using standard C# COM ports. A COM
port was utilized to send data between the Unity environment and a microcontroller then communicates
over a separate RX/TX with the motor controller. The data that is shared between these systems is simply
the desired encoder counts that each actuator should be positioned at. The COM port operates at 115200
baud allowing for fast data transfer. Consequently, the encoder positions are updated once per frame (30
frames per second), an update rate of 0.5 ms. The baud rate of the connection is faster than the frame
update, allowing the position to be updated in real-time.
9
4.3 Software
The design of the device relies on the information encoded within the virtual environment. The link
between the physical device and the virtual representation still needs to be established. We create this
link by developing a virtual model of the device, tracking this model in virtual space, and communicating
relevant information to control the actuators.
4.3.1 Virtual tracking
Critical to all virtual representations is the ability to track physical devices in the virtual environment.
Tracking our device in the virtual environment is necessary for determining when the user interacts with
the environment. The method for tracking our device in space is adapted from the HTC VIVE platform.
The accuracy and precision of virtual tracking are dependent on an understanding of the orientation of the
base stations and the object being tracked. The location and rotation of the base stations is determined
by using the built in functions of the SteamVR API running within Unity. After setup, TS3633-CM1 IR
sensors attached to the device output a low voltage pulse train signal that is used to calculate the sensor’s
position in the space. By reverse engineering the tracking method used by the HTC VIVE, we are able to
track a custom controller in the virtual environment.
The results of the sensor test outlined in the Appendix concluded that the authors’ attempt at virtual
tracking was not reliable; a design choice was made to purchase an HTC VIVE Tracker. Integrating this
Tracker provided reliable and precise spatial location of the lower arm, allowing accurate and stable joint
limits to be calculated.
4.3.2 Virtual environment
The integrated HTC Tracker provides accurate position and rotation in Unity. However, this information
is not a complete picture for generating contact. The arm was modeled in virtual space to understand
the physical location of the arm. This is done in Unity by using built-in joints. In order to model the
arm in a simple way, the HTC VIVE HMD was used as a secondary data point. This was done because
the tracking data for the HMD is already well understood. In understanding the head’s position, and the
position below the elbow where the Tracker is mounted, the arm’s complete position can be inferred. The
upper arm is not directly tracked in this model, but is instead assumed by the location of the elbow and
the head. This model works because the elbow only has one degree of freedom from the upper arm,
and can only move in a well-defined manner. The movement of the arm can be estimated using virtual
representations of the joints that physically exist in the arm. At the elbow, a hinge joint is used, simulating
a single rotational axis about which the lower arm rotates. By knowing the Tracker’s exact position on
the arm, the hinge joint’s position can be calculated. At the shoulder, a spring joint is used to force an
upper arm model to be constrained between a collar-bone-like object (derived from the head’s location),
and the elbow’s location. The spring joint allows its spring, object mass, and damping constants to be set
in order to control the behavior of the multi-degree of freedom joint. By designing the arm model in this
way, Unity calculates the inverse kinematics natively. Once the model of the arm is well defined in Unity,
the interactions it can have need to be defined. In Unity, physics collisions are understood through the use
of mesh colliders. In this context, mesh colliders are interchangeable with the terminology of hitboxes,
both of which are non-rendered objects that simply trigger a change in an algorithm. Once the hitboxes are
set for each interactable object, including the arm, collision algorithms can be created. These algorithms
understand when two hitboxes collide, and a programmed outcome can be activated. It is the activation of
the programmed outcomes that are considered interactions. By recognizing which hitboxes are in contact
with other objects, the range of motion can be calculated in real-time.
10
Figure 9: Shown is an exploded view of the actuator design. From left to right, the encoder with mounting
hardware, the encoder shaft (highlighted in blue), the motor and mounting hardware, the pulley shaft
(highlighted in blue) and mounting hardware, and the 32 tooth pulley.
5 Methods
Position lock, actuator control, device packaging, and the virtual environment have all been designed to
produce a high-fidelity immersive device. In this section the methods by which the mechanical, electrical,
and control systems were manufactured, assembled, and developed are described.
5.1 Mechanical
Producing a high-fidelity immersive device on a budget requires purchasing and manufacturing many
mechanical components. With the bi-directional slot mechanism being the focal point of the device, the
authors selected an acetal pulley suited for a GT2 fiber-reinforced belt. This pulley features 120 teeth and
was chosen for this amount of teeth, and reasonably small diameter of 75.90mm. This allows the pulleys
to fit approximately within the contour of a standard user’s arm at the elbow joint. The selected pulley has
a hub with a brass bushing pressed into it. To decrease the required shaft length of the bi-directional slot
mechanism, the hubs were machined flush with the flange. The slot that is the basis of the bi-directional
slot mechanism is directly machined into the face of the 120 tooth pulleys.
In order to drive the bi-directional slot mechanism’s pulleys, drive pulleys must be mounted on the motors.
The authors selected 32 tooth pulleys for this purpose. The 32 tooth pulleys were selected to generate
the highest gear ratio possible with no additional gearing. The resulting gear ratio is 3.75x mechanical
advantage at the bi-directional slot mechanism. Both pulleys were constrained to an 8mm shaft size based
on the very first motor choice. This design choice was carried through to the final presentation of the
prototype, although smaller motors were used. All of these components are shown highlighted in a bright
blue color, in Figure 9.
To ensure the pulleys would fit upon the smaller motors, adapter shafts were designed and machined out
of 6061 Aluminum. These shafts were made to fit upon the previously selected Gartt branded BLDCs. In
order to install encoders on the BLDCs, additional encoder shafts were designed and machined to fasten
to the back of the BLDCs. These shafts were turned from 6061 Aluminum. With these two engineered
shafts, the actuators can be assembled.
The pulleys of the bi-directional slot mechanism are mounted through bushings on a stationary shaft,
made of 6061 Aluminum, that is indirectly mounted through mounting plates to the upper arm section of
the brace. The only relative motion between the pulleys needs to be the intentional motion generated by
the actuators, therefore the shaft must be mounted to the upper arm that the actuators are mounted upon.
Since the pulleys and lower arm rotate about the same axis, the shaft was designed with two different
11
Figure 10: Detailed exploded view of the bi-directional slot mechanism is shown. Along the main ro-
tational axis, from left to right, a shaft collar, spacing washers, the bi-directional slot mechanism, and
the main shaft. The two arm brace segments are sandwiched between two low-friction spacers, fastened
together by two slotted plates and accompanying hardware. The ROM limiting pin (shown underneath the
main shaft) is pressed into the lower arm section and is limited between the bi-directional slot mechanism.
diameters to provide a surface for all of these components to rotate about. The shaft was designed in
such a way that when its fastening screw is tightened, the shaft does not bind and create resistance in the
rotational joint.
The mounting plates that union the upper arm and the main rotational shaft were based on the mounting
plates that the original arm brace was manufactured with. The modified mounting plates were machined
with a slot larger than the bi-directional slot mechanism, and are intended for use as an emergency hard
stop. The lower limit of the plates are placed at such an angle that the hard stop would be reached
before the arm could be hyper-extended. Borrowing a material choice from the original arm brace, these
mounting plates were manufactured out of low-carbon, galvanized steel. The upper arm was redesigned
and manufactured out of 6061 aluminum bar. Its design was based upon the original arm brace, and
was modified to be longer and to facilitate all necessary mounting points for the structural covers. The
lower arm was modified from the original arm brace. A bored hole was made to create an interference fit
for the ROM pin in the lower arm. Additionally, holes were re-sized to allow standardization of mounting
hardware. Other than these two modifications, the lower arm segment remains as purchased. The mounting
plates, upper and lower arm segments, and bi-directional slot mechanism are shown in Figure 10. All
structural covers including the multi-purpose mounting surface, the lower sensor cover, and the motor
mount were additively manufactured on a Markforged X7.
In order to mount every component to the 3D-printed covers and modified arm brace, fasteners are needed.
To fasten screws into the 3D-printed components, heat-set brass threaded inserts were used. These are
easier to install and more durable than threading the 3D-printed components or using press-fit brass thread
inserts. This alternative requires a significant amount of force and precise tolerances to press the inserts
into the plastic to ensure they function as intended. Standard metric hardware was used throughout the
design, ranging from thread diameters of M2.5 to M5. Screw diameters were chosen based on available
stock, existing holes (such as the Arduino), and ease of assembly with minimal tools. Based on these
actions, each component has a defined location in which it is mounted.
12
Figure 11: Left: IR sensor breakout board with three-pin JST connector surface-mounted on the back.
Right: Arduino Due shield with connectors for wiring harnesses, Arduino Nano pin headers, three moni-
toring LEDs with current limiting resistors, and two-pin JST for serial communication with ODrive.
5.2 Electrical
After locating each component, we can begin to build the necessary electrical architecture. There are
many challenges when wiring a large electrical structure. In this section, we discuss the methods used to
facilitate simple connections and the components used to connect larger electronics.
5.2.1 Printed Circuit Boards
To facilitate simple connections between electrical components such as the IR sensors and the Arduino
Due, two printed circuit boards (PCBs) were created. PCBs are instrumental in creating a clean, finished
product that eliminates the need for non-permanent methods of electrical connections such as breadboards.
The first PCB that can be designed is a breakout board for the IR sensors. The IR sensors have three
important connections, 3.3V, signal, and ground; these signals were broken-out onto a larger PCB with
mounting holes and a surface mount three-pin JST (Japan Solderless Terminals) connector to facilitate wire
harnessing once all sensors are in place. The power pin is placed in the middle of the three-pin connector
to provide protection against incorrect pinning. With this, the signal and ground pins can be reversed with
minimal damage to the electrical system. To facilitate connections to the Arduino Due, a second PCB is
designed. This PCB, referred to as the Arduino Due shield, collects the connections from all of the sensor
breakout boards and routes them to the respective signal pins on the Arduino. The three signals from each
board are routed into 16-pin connectors to facilitate wire harnessing. Each sensor’s signal is connected
to two digital pins, due to the fact that the Arduino tracking software needs to understand both rising
and falling pulse lengths, and a single signal pin is only capable of reading either rising or falling pulses,
and is not capable of reading both simultaneously on a single pin. In addition, the Arduino Due shield
has pin headers for an Arduino Nano, which is the microcontroller that communicates with the ODrive.
The Arduino Nano is completely disconnected, except for the ground pins, from the Arduino Due, but
the shield provides a convenient mounting location for the Arduino Nano. Mounted above the Arduino
Nano, are three surface mount monitoring LEDs (with series current-limiting surface mount resistors),
and a two-pin JST that connects to the harness for the ODrive. Both of these PCBs are seen in Figure 11.
These PCBs provide hard-wired, reliable traces for all electrical signals, to minimize external wiring and
improve overall aesthetic.
13
5.2.2 Hardware
With the necessary electronic boards and surface mount connectors in place, wiring harnesses can be built
and installed to complete our electrical architecture. In building each harness, a great deal of care must
be put into ensuring each cable is properly connected and of the proper length. From the Arduino shield,
all cables were terminated with JST style terminals and installed into the mating connectors. The harness
from the shield to the array of sensors on the lower arm included an intermediate disconnect to allow this
assembly to be removed with little effort. Communication between the shield, as well as the encoders, to
the ODrive required DuPont terminals. The three phase outputs on the ODrive use Phoenix Contact screw
terminal blocks. Each cable was terminated with wire ferrules to provide a more reliable connection.
Reliable harnessing was achieved by using the correct crimping tool and routing each cable in a manner
that would not interfere with the user’s motion.
After mounting and locating each component, they must all be powered. The IR sensors all require 3.3V
which can be supplied from the Arduino Due. The Arduino Due gets power from a USB connection to
the computer. The Arduino Nano also derives its 5V power from a USB connection to the computer.
The ODrive supplies the power needed to actuate the motors, it draws this power from a COTS AC/DC
converter rated at 24VDC/15A. This converter provides more than enough power for the BLDC motors,
due to the current transformation that is intrinsic to a BLDC.
The selected motors are Gartt ML5215 340KV BLDC machines. Given the velocity constant of the spec-
ified motors, the maximum speed at which the motors can physically rotate is equivalent to 8160 rads−1
.
Dividing by the gear ratio of 3.75, discussed in the Mechanical section, the bi-directional slot mechanism
is capable of rotating at 2176 rads−1. Deriving the torque constant from the velocity constant, the theo-
retical torque constant is equivalent to 0.028,NmA−1. Multiplying by the current limit set by the ODrive,
40A, 1.12 Nm is achieved at the motors’ shafts. Multiplying the theoretical torque value by the gear ratio
of 3.75, results in a torque of 4.2 Nm at the bi-directional slot mechanism.
5.3 Software
With the mechanical and electrical structures designed, the actuators must have an input to generate the
physical ROM limits. This input is instrumental in creating the feeling of immersion. The following
sections describe how the tracking within the virtual environment creates the input to the actuators. A
flow-chart representation of this software is provided in the Appendix, Section 10.1.
5.3.1 Virtual tracking
With the electrical architecture completed, each tracking sensor is now producing a signal to be interpreted.
Using an algorithm, this signal of high and low voltages must be converted to spacial coordinates. The
high-low output of each sensor was connected to two interrupts on the Arduino. One interrupt was set to
monitor rising edge events and the other, falling edge events. It is possible to set an interrupt pin so that it
monitors both rising and falling events but this greatly complicated the calculation of time between events.
With the freedom of numerous interrupt pins, the simpler, two pin solution was used. As previously
mentioned, the timing between interrupts encodes the spacial position of the sensor between the base
stations. The algorithm then takes the timing, or pulse width, and determines which pulse corresponds to
the vertical and horizontal plane sweeps. The angular offset of each sensor is calculated from the pulse
width using Equation 8. If the angular position appears to be incorrect, it may be necessary to invert the
angular value but subtracting it from 180◦. The Arduino then takes the four angular offsets (two for each
base station) of each sensor and sends the information via serial communication to Unity.
In Unity, the first step is to split the transmitted string from the Arduino. Data per sensor is split at a
delimiter (":") and stored in an array. Each item in the array is then checked with a search pattern (regular
14
expression). If the data matches, it is further split by a second delimiter (",") into the individual angular
offsets and converted from a string to a float. With the angular offsets in the form of a float, we can begin
to convert this information from a local to global context. The vertical and horizontal angular offsets are
converted to Cartesian coordinates using Equations 9-11. The Cartesian vector is then rotated using three
rotation matrices derived from the base station Euler angles. As matrix multiplication is noncommutative,
correct order of multiplication for this application is Y-X-Z. After matrix multiplication, the vector is
offset with respect to the orientation of the base station. The location of each sensor is then solved as the
intersection of two lines using Equations 14-15. This process was repeated for each string of values in the
array, corresponding to each sensor.
5.3.2 Virtual environment
The previous section described how the location of each sensor was calculated. The location of each sensor
then needs to be attached to a corresponding Unity game object. The script that determines location
is attached to a game object and is indexed to the corresponding sensor number. Figure 12 shows the
game objects whos’ location is determined by the tracking algorithm. The right half of this figure shows
their actual position relative to the device. A single sensor is highlighted (blue) to show its corresponding
location on the device. At this point in our development, we elected to use the HTC VIVE Tracker. Further
discussion of this decision is explained in Section 6.
Figure 12: Sensor tracking in the virtual environment compared to the orientation of the physical device.
One sensor is highlighted to show its position on the physical device.
As discussed in Section 4.1.2 the HTC VIVE Tracker was affixed to the lower arm. The location of the
Tracker relative to the device served as the foundation for modeling the user’s arm in Unity. Game objects
(rectangular prisms) were created to represent (1:1 scale) the user’s upper and lower arm. The location
and rotation of the lower arm is determined using the design choices outlined in section 4.3.2. Tuning the
parameters in the shoulder spring joint created an accurate representation of the upper arm. The following
parameters (arbitrary units) where chosen: spring constant 50k, damping coefficient 1.5k, angular drag 5.
The mass of the upper arm was also set to 0.5. These methods provided an accurate representation of the
user’s arm.
By accurately representing the user’s arm with the VIVE components we can start to investigate how their
arm is interacting with other virtual objects. Our bi-directional slot mechanism is interested in controlling
the range of motion which is less dependent on the location of the lower arm but is defined by the position
of the upper arm. Therefore, an array of hitboxes were modeled around the upper arm and can be viewed
in Figure 13. The array consists for 41 hitboxes that are the width and length of the average person’s arm.
Each hitbox is offset 3.75◦from the previous hitbox to cover the entire range of motion. This method, is
able to understand the correct range of motion in any orientation of the arm and but does not provide the
virtual understanding needed for translating this information to the actuators.
15
Figure 13: Virtual model of the user’s arm. The array of 41 hitboxes fan out to cover the elbow’s range of
motion.
To extract the range of motion from the hitboxes, and thus actuate the bi-directional slot mechanism, three
things need to be understood. That being: the lower bound, the upper bound, and the location of the
arm within the array of hitboxes. Starting with the arm’s current hitbox, each subsequent hitbox above
and below the arm was checked. By starting at the arm’s current location of the algorithm is able to
avoid problematic scenarios where contact does not enter the entire upper or lower bounds. If an object is
present, the algorithm will extract the particular hitbox number(s) for determining the upper and/or lower
bounds.
Determining which hitbox number is active is not enough to actuate each slot mechanism. To resolve a
useful parameter, the hitbox number is multiplied by the angular resolution to determine what angle the
actuator needs to move to. This angle is multiplied by an encoder constant and the gear ratio to translate
the angle into a value the actuators can understand. This information is sent from Unity to the Arduino
Nano as a string. The string consists of a set number of integers followed by an indicator for which
actuator should be updated. The explicit format of this data is as follows: ”(−)00000a(−)00000b”, where
the five zeros can be any number 0-9, and a or b represents each actuator. The encoders are capable of
8192 encoder counts per revolution of the motor, but given the gear ratio of the actuators, numbers higher
than 8192 can be expected. Negative values are optional and occasionally used to move the motors in a
clockwise direction. The microcontroller parses these values per actuator, formats the data and sends the
data to the motor controller over a software serial connection. This communication structure was chosen
because the motor controller has an open-source library for microcontrollers in order to send parameters
to the motor controller.
5.3.3 ODrive
The parameters from the microcontroller are sent to the ODrive motor controller. The motor controller’s
ability to correctly actuate the bi-directional slot mechanism is dependent on how each axis is configured.
This configuration is performed over a Python terminal using a manufacturer provided interface. Key
parameters that are necessary in this configuration are motor pole pairs, maximum motor current, maxi-
mum motor velocity, the characteristics of the encoders being used, acceleration and decceleration limits,
and control method. The motor pole pairs for the selected motors was counted as 11 pairs. This setting
16
will prevent the configuration from properly controlling the motor if set incorrectly. The maximum motor
current was set to 40A to prevent burning the motor coils and the maximum motor velocity was limited
to 20000 counts per second to prevent extreme overshoot. The controller will return a fault if the encoder
parameters are not set correctly; each encoder must be set to 8192 counts per revolution.
When errors were encountered with either axis on the controller, the Python tool was utilized to learn
where the fault happened, and to clear the fault and return the axis to operational status. Common faults
that were encountered included the controller missing the encoder index, and a controller error caused
by moving a motor too quickly. Every fault will immediately halt the motor, signalling that a fault has
occurred. The common encoder fault was resolved by re-calibrating the encoder index offset. The over-
velocity fault was resolved by decreasing the acceleration/decceleration limits, forcing the motors to move
into position more slowly. Any other fault can be tracked to a specific target within the controller, and
resolved accordingly. By properly setting these parameters, reliable motion control was achieved.
6 Evaluation
In this work, we developed a device that simulates contact with virtual objects by limiting the user’s range
of motion. The following evaluation explores the result of each method used. The details provided in
this section discuss the device’s ability to meet the design objectives and how the tracking algorithm and
immersion can be improved. To verify that Design Objective 1 was met, the device was placed on a test
fixture and the lower arm was moved freely, while virtual objects varied the range of motion through
both types of restriction: shift and tighten. In order to verify Design Objective 1, it was implied that
Design Objective 2 already be verified. The success of Design Objective 2 was qualified by the ability to
physically position the two motors independently by moving a virtual object into a hitbox of the virtual
representation of the arm. Design Objective 3 was verified by wearing the device, as shown in Figure 14,
and moving in and out of virtual objects that would cause a change in the ROM. When a virtual object
is not within the user’s natural ROM, the user has a maximum of 88.5% (135◦) of their natural ROM
as defined by an average taken from the Man-Systems Integration Standards from NASA. The ROM is
limited by either: a constriction due to strap placement or a collision between the HTC VIVE Tracker and
the upper structure.
Figure 14: A user testing virtual boundary contact within the test environment.
Design Objective 4 was not met because the resolution of human anthropometry at the elbow joint is
described as 2◦[20], while the device has a resolution of 3.75◦. The resolution of the device is an artifact
of the quantity of hitboxes and can be further resolved by simply adding more hitboxes. Design Objective
5 was quantified by measuring the device’s stiffness by performing a spring constant experiment. The
17
test placed a known mass on the lower arm, while keeping the upper arm fixed upon a static fixture. By
measuring the linear displacement, the linear equivalent spring constant of the joint was calculated. This
yielded a single motor’s spring constant through the belt and pulley system, measuring 15.2 Ncm−1. The
spring constant should measure at least 151 Ncm−1 in order to simulate a stiff surface [20]. The evaluation
of this device extends past our design objectives. Here, we consider the actions that would improve the
spatial tracking and immersive quality of the device. The tracking algorithm was able to locate the relative
position of a sensor within 7.5%, or a maximum precision of 1.2 mm. This value is acceptable for VR
applications but our algorithm was unreliable and a commercial device was implemented. However, steps
can be made to greatly improve the reliability. The solution lacks any logic that is able to process incorrect
or incomplete sensor data. Incorrect sensor data would come from optical distortions i.e. reflections,
or communication faults. Incomplete sensor data is the result of poor base station visibility and this
prevents the sensor location from updating. Adding conditions that can process such events would make
the algorithm more robust. If this functionality was included, the device reliability would still fall short of
the commercial product. To match the reliability of the commercial device, more sensors need to be added
and their placement must be optimized. This would require developing end-use PCBs for use with the
sensors that are embedded on the TS3633-CM1 modules. Integrating an accelerometer/gyroscope would
further increase reliability to that of a commercial device. With these improvements, we would have a
more reliable foundation for our own tracking system.
Primary to this evaluation is the device’s ability to foster an immersive experience. The considerations
involved in achieving an immersive experience extend beyond the stated design objectives. The first
consideration for achieving an immersive experience is the feeling of contact. The initial prototype allows
the user to feel contact, but when the belt split under tension the feeling of immersive is lost. A more
immersive experience can be generated by improving the rigidity of the motor mount to prevent flexure.
Flexure can be reduced by designing a rigid motor mount and this would allow the GT2 belts to be installed
under greater tension and prevent belt slippage. Removing the concern of belt slippage would enable the
user to apply more force onto objects in the virtual environment that they can interact with and enhance
the feeling of contact. Immersion is also drastically improved by creating a device that accomplishes
kinethestic feedback, while remaining as small and lightweight as possible. The current device weighs
about 1.755kg, of which 8 percent is hardware. Ideally, hardware would be eliminated and the device
would be redesigned for snap fit assembly and tool-free maintenance.
The results of the evaluation show that the primary objectives that generate a feeling of contact were met,
although two of the objectives that qualify forceful applications failed. The device is able to limit the
user’s ROM in accordance with virtual objects, thus simulating boundary contact.
7 Future work
There are two considerable paths for the future of the device. The first path is to streamline the presented
prototype into a more integrated and lightweight device for the arm. Streamlining can be achieved by
removing all non-essential hardware through more integrated design, improving the sensor layout to obtain
better spatial coverage, and refining the actuators to achieve desired stiffness while saving weight. The
second path is to develop and refine a generic joint-mounted device that provides similar performance to
the presented system in a lightweight modular package. This modular design would be redesigned around
smaller actuators. This would prevent the device from fulfilling Design Objective 6. By abandoning this
objective the device would be better suited for the primary goal of furthering immersion. Similar to the
device presented in this work the next iteration would include an integrated tracking system, lightweight
and high speed actuators with a large gear reduction, and the novel slotted ROM limiting mechanism.
18
8 Conclusion
We presented a device that furthers the physical immersion in virtual environments. It is shown that a
bi-directional slot mechanism provides effective simulation of virtual boundaries without affecting natural
motion. By evaluating the design, the requirements for a single degree of freedom device should be limited
to simulating boundary contact. This work stands as a foundation for the future of immersive technology.
9 References
[1] Sutherland, I. E., 1968. “A head-mounted three dimensional display”. In Proceedings of the Decem-
ber 9-11, 1968, Fall Joint Computer Conference, Part I, AFIPS ’68 (Fall, part I), ACM, pp. 757–764.
[2] Belda-Lois, J.-M., Mena-del Horno, S., Bermejo-Bosch, I., Moreno, J. C., Pons, J. L., Farina, D.,
Iosa, M., Molinari, M., Tamburella, F., Ramos, A., et al., 2011. “Rehabilitation of gait after stroke: a
review towards a top-down approach”. Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, 8(1), p. 66.
[3] Bortole, M., Venkatakrishnan, A., Zhu, F., Moreno, J. C., Francisco, G. E., Pons, J. L., and Contreras-
Vidal, J. L., 2015. “The h2 robotic exoskeleton for gait rehabilitation after stroke: early findings from
a clinical study”. Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, 12(1), p. 54.
[4] Seymour, N. E., Gallagher, A. G., Roman, S. A., O’brien, M. K., Bansal, V. K., Andersen, D. K.,
and Satava, R. M., 2002. “Virtual reality training improves operating room performance: results of
a randomized, double-blinded study”. Annals of surgery, 236(4), p. 458.
[5] Bowman, D. A., and McMahan, R. P., 2007. “Virtual reality: how much immersion is enough?”.
Computer, 40(7).
[6] Zyda, M., 2005. “From visual simulation to virtual reality to games”. Computer, 38(9), pp. 25–32.
[7] Pantelidis, V. S., 1993. “Virtual reality in the classroom”. Educational Technology, 33(4), pp. 23–27.
[8] Tsai, H.-R., and Rekimoto, J., 2018. “Elasticvr: Providing multi-level active and passive force
feedback in virtual reality using elasticity”. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, p. D300.
[9] Benko, H., Holz, C., Sinclair, M., and Ofek, E., 2016. “Normaltouch and texturetouch: High-fidelity
3d haptic shape rendering on handheld virtual reality controllers”. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, UIST ’16, ACM, pp. 717–728.
[10] Jadhav, S., Kannanda, V., Kang, B., Tolley, M. T., and Schulze, J. P., 2017. “Soft robotic glove for
kinesthetic haptic feedback in virtual reality environments”. Electronic Imaging, 2017(3), pp. 19–24.
[11] Rietzler, M., Geiselhart, F., Frommel, J., and Rukzio, E., 2018. “Conveying the perception of kines-
thetic feedback in virtual reality using state-of-the-art hardware”. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, p. 460.
[12] Okamura, A. M., 2009. “Haptic feedback in robot-assisted minimally invasive surgery”. Current
opinion in urology, 19(1), p. 102.
[13] Just, M., Stapley, P. J., Ros, M., Naghdy, F., and Stirling, D., 2016. “Effects of reintroducing haptic
feedback to virtual-reality systems on movement profiles when reaching to virtual targets”.
19
[14] Losey, D. P., McDonald, C. G., Battaglia, E., and O’Malley, M. K., 2018. “A review of intent detec-
tion, arbitration, and communication aspects of shared control for physical human–robot interaction”.
Applied Mechanics Reviews, 70(1), p. 010804.
[15] Weisstein, E. W., 2003. “Rotation matrix”.
[16] Weisstein, E. W., 2004. “Quaternion”.
[17] Quiñones, D. R., Lopes, G., Kim, D., Honnet, C., Moratal, D., and Kampff, A., 2018. “Hive tracker:
a tiny, low-cost, and scalable device for sub-millimetric 3d positioning”. Augmented Human, 9.
[18] Hall, E. H., 1879. “On a new action of the magnet on electric currents”. American Journal of
Mathematics, 2(3), pp. 287–292.
[19] Gonzalez, C., 2017. What’s the difference between absolute and incremental encoders?
[20] Tan, H. Z., Srinivasan, M. A., Eberman, B., and Cheng, B. “Human factors for the design of force-
reflecting haptic interfaces”.
[21] Klopˇ car, N., and Lenarˇ ciˇ c, J., 2005. “Kinematic model for determination of human arm reachable
workspace”. Meccanica, 40(2), pp. 203–219.
[22] Jessop, D. M., and Pain, M. T., 2016. “Maximum velocities in flexion and extension actions for
sport”. Journal of human kinetics, 50(1), pp. 37–44.
10 Appendix
10.1 Software Architecture
20
Hitbox Instantiated
Script
(colorchanger)
Update()
Clear contact flags
if hitbox[n]
triggered
By Lower Arm Object
Determine the hitbox
that Lower Arm
Object is within
Change Lower Arm
color
Environment Begin
By any other object
if
exit
enter
hitbox[n],
entered = false
hitbox[n],
entered = true
21
Hitbox Monitoring
Script
Update()
if hitbox[n]
triggered
Y
hitbox[n],
state = 1
N
hitbox number[n],
state = 0
Add to array of all hitboxes
Environment Begin
ROM Limit
Calculation Script
Motor
Communication
Script
Update()
Open Serial Port
if upper
bound
N
Y
Search upwards from
Lower Arm Object's
position for closest
hitbox in contact
Update()
Search downwards
from Lower Arm
Object's position for
closest hitbox in
contact
Convert limits into
encoder counts for
each motor
Acknowledge new
positions were
received (debug)
Generate upper and lower limits based on
hitbox range that the Lower Arm Object is within
Track location of
VIVE HMD
Translate Shoulder
Object and follow
HMD
Point Upper Arm
Object at Shoulder
Object using a joint
22
Tracked Objects
Update()
Track location of
VIVE Base Stations
Track location of
VIVE Tracker
Transform Lower Arm
Object
Motor Control
(ODrive)
Startup
if motors
calibrated
Find encoder index
Enter closed loop
control
Go to position 0
Position Loop
check
encoder &
setpoint
Correct motor
position
Motor Control
(Serial)
Setup
Calibrate motor
phase inductance
and resistance
if motors
calibrated
N
Control error: check
ODrive debug
Y
LED indicators on
Loop()
Parse position
command
Send position
command
Hold position
23
24
10.2 Sensor Test
Measuring Accuracy of Tracking Algorithm
Andrew Zucker, Owen Medeiros, Jared Talamini
Purpose
Infrared sensors are used in the VIVE system to conduct spatial tracking. The most important parameters
of spatial tracking is accuracy. In order to test the accuracy and precision of the custom tracking algorithm
developed by the authors, a quantitative test is performed.
Background
The VIVE system uses two infrared light emitters known as base stations to generate pulses and infrared
laser sweeps used in the spatial tracking algorithm. Each base station consists of two spinning motors that
sweep an IR laser across the room in the X and Y directions respectively, and a timing flash consisting
of IR LED’s. An example of the pulse train generated by the base stations can be seen in Figure 15. The
pulses that occur at a regular frequency are called the timing pulse. Both of the base stations flood the
room with IR light in order to generate a distinct and regular pattern for the tracking algorithm to base its
timing upon. The shorter pulses that happen between these cycles of timing pulses are the location sweeps.
There are four location sweeps per cycle, each separated by a timing pulse sequence. Given that the base
stations operate at constant frequency and angular velocity, the location in the room can be interpreted by
a tracking algorithm.
Figure 15: Depicted is an example of four sequences of data generated by two base stations and captured
by a TS3633-CM1 module. Starting each sequence is two timing pulses of a pre-specified length, the
length corresponding to a specific base station. The short pulse before the next sequence is the laser plane
sweep location. It is to be noted that the actual output of the sensors are the inverse of this graph, as the
Light-to-Digital converters are active-low sensors.
25
In order to understand a 3-dimensional location of a sensor, four data points are needed: X and Y
spherical location from both base stations. The tracking algorithm must understand which base station is
currently sweeping the room, and in which direction in order to interpret the spatial position of a given
sensor. The distance between the timing pulses and the laser plane sweep is the angular location of the
sensor in the given plane of the sweep. This can be converted into Cartesian coordinates using a simple
transformation. It is worth stating that as this is a timing based system, data processing on the data input
side is instrumental in generating accurate results.
Materials
• 2 VIVE Base Stations, VIVE HMD
• PC with SteamVR installed, and Unity environment with tracking algorithm
• 2 or more TS3633-CR1 Light-to-Digital Converters
• Breadboard and hookup wires
• Microcontroller capable of high frequency interrupts and firmware to decode pulse train
• Calipers
Methods
1. Set up the VIVE system in the room that testing is to be performed
2. Download SteamVR application
3. Perform "Room Setup" within the SteamVR menu such that the orientation and position of each
base station can be understood within the Unity environment
4. Measure distance between two TS3633-CM1 modules placed on a breadboard
5. Measure virtual distance between two modules within Unity environment while moving throughout
the designated VIVE play area
The virtual distance was measured at each of the points detailed in Figure 16.
Figure 16: The test was performed in the center of the tracking area, and about each corner of the room
that the base stations were installed in.
26
Results
Position Virtual Distance Actual Distance Measured Error
P0 P1 P2 P3 P4 10.7 cm 11.9 cm 10.0 cm 8.5 cm 10.2 cm 10.2 cm 10.2 cm 10.2 cm 10.2 cm 10.2 cm 3.1%
14.6%
2.0%
18.0%
0%
Analysis of Results
Within the center of the tracking zone, measured distance error is minimized. While closer to either base
station, the accuracy of the measured distance deviates up to 18%.
Conclusion
While tracking using a custom algorithm can be quite accurate, this number fluctuates greatly as the
sensors are moved throughout the tracking space and is unreliable in generating accurate virtual locations.
27
10.3 Gantt Chart
2018
Sep Oct Nov Project Formulation
Research Need
Proposal
Proposal Presentation
Decision Matrix
Submit for ELMC Grant
Begin Design
Research Bio-Kinematics
Define Kinematics
in MATLAB Design
Mechanical
Define Mechanisms
& linkages
Design Actuators
Electrical
Schematic Capture
PCB layout
VR R&D
Software
Familiarize VR Sensors
Micro-Controller
Open Loop Control
Implementation
Analysis of Design Integration
Troubleshoot Integration
Finalize Design
Fall Final Presentation
Bill of Materials
2018 Final Proposal
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
28
Dec
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
2019
Jan Feb Mar Apr
Preparation
Order Remaining Parts
Finalize Design
Manufacturing
Mechanical Components Drawings
Completed and Reviewed
3D Print Mechanical Components
Fabricating Mechanical Components
Assembly
Mechanical Assembly
Electronics Assembly
& Implementation
Software Implementation
Integration of Electronics and Software
Integration of Mechanical, Electrical
& Software Components
Closed loop control
Qualification
Prototype testing
Troubleshoot Components
Complete Working Prototype
Final Administrative Work
Final presentation preparation
Final presentation
Final report
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
100% complete
Symbol Key
Summary Task
Task
Linked Task
Progress
Milestone
75% complete
29
30
10.4 BOM
Part Number Quantity Price/unit Extended Price Fees/Tax Link Total Price Total $1,630.80 Remaining $369.20
3M Strips 1 $7.26 $7.26 Target $7.26
VESC + necessary wiring accessories 1 $242.92 $242.92 https://diyelectricskateboard.com/collections/electric-skateboard-motors/products/electric-s $242.92
ELECTRIC SKATEBOARD MOTOR 6355 190KV 2 $60.00 $120.00 $5.00 https://diyelectricskateboard.com/collections/featured-items/products/electric-skateboard-m $125.00
Elbow Brace 1 $65.79 $65.79 https://www.amazon.com/Orthomen-ROM-Hinged-Elbow-Brace/dp/B079BH6497 $65.79
GT2 Belt Stock 1 $8.99 $8.99 https://www.amazon.com/Mercurry-Meters-timing-Rostock-GT2-6mm/dp/B071K8HYB4/ref= $8.99
Belt Clamp 1 $7.99 $7.99 https://www.amazon.com/Mercurry-Timing-Aluminum-Clamp-Mount/dp/B01HGYI4ZK/ref=s $7.99
Belt Pulley 120 tooth, 8mm bore 4 $14.29 $57.16 http://shop.sdp-si.com/catalog/product/?id=A_6Z51M120DF0608 $57.16
Belt Pulley 32 tooth, 8mm bore 4 $4.09 $16.36 http://shop.sdp-si.com/catalog/product/?id=A_6L51M032DF0608 $16.36
Arduino Due 1 $37.44 $37.44 https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00A6C3JN2/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_asin_title_o00__o00_ $37.44
S3B-PH-SM4-TB(LF)(SN)‎ B16B-PH-K-S(LF)(SN) SPH-001T-P0.5L B2B-PH-K-S(LF)(SN 20 $0.66 $11.72 https://www.arrow.com/en/products/s3b-ph-sm4-tb-lf-sn/jst-manufacturing $11.72
6 $0.48 $2.90 https://www.arrow.com/en/products/b16b-ph-k-s-lf-sn/jst-manufacturing $2.90
200 $0.07 $14.40 https://www.arrow.com/en/products/sph-001t-p0.5l/jst-manufacturing $14.40
5 $0.15 $0.76 https://www.arrow.com/en/products/b2b-ph-k-s-lf-sn/jst-manufacturing $0.76
Shipping $1.63 $1.63
BNTECHGO 22 Gauge Silicone Wire Spool White 250 feet 1 $44.98 $44.98 https://www.amazon.com/BNTECHGO-Silicone-Flexible-Stranded-Impedance/dp/B071L38 $44.98
T.R.U. EL-766AW White General Purpose Electrical Tape (pack of 2) 1 $7.49 $7.49 https://www.amazon.com/EL-766AW-General-Purpose-Electrical-Synthetic/dp/B01ATXVJ3 $7.49
100pcs Male Header Pins 1 $6.99 $6.99 https://www.amazon.com/Header-Lystaii-Pin-Connector-Electronic/dp/B06ZZN8L9S/ref=sr_ $6.99
Mini Nano V3.0 ATmega328P Microcontroller Board USB Cable for Arduino 1 $8.29 $8.29 https://www.amazon.com/ATmega328P-Microcontroller-Board-Cable-Arduino/dp/B00NLAM $8.29
10ft mini usb 1 $7.99 $7.99 https://www.amazon.com/UGREEN-Charging-Controller-Players-Receiver/dp/B00P0GI696 $7.99
Shipping $0.00
W54035ASV7, W54035ASV8 1 $39.00 $39.00 https://drive.google.com/open?id=1X0ZYj--57aG-oVui3okE-7tIzU0fT_xh $39.00
ODrive V3.5 Options: 24V, with connectors 1 $129.00 $129.00 https://odriverobotics.com/shop/odrive-v35 $129.00
CUI AMT102-V 2 $39.00 $78.00 https://odriverobotics.com/shop/cui-amt-102 $78.00
Shipping 1 $12.48 $12.48 https://drive.google.com/open?id=1VtCmuuz2IHa8qpQJvmVgHQKNqOp9Z3_8 $12.48
JST PHR-3 25 $0.10 $1.50 https://www.digikey.com/product-detail/en/jst-sales-america-inc/PHR-3/455-1126-ND/52735 $1.50
JST PHR-16 6 $0.40 $2.40 https://www.digikey.com/product-detail/en/jst-sales-america-inc/PHR-16/455-1152-ND/6085 $2.40
JST PHR-2 5 $0.10 $0.50 https://www.digikey.com/product-detail/en/jst-sales-america-inc/PHR-2/455-1165-ND/60860 $0.50
LTST-C171GKT 10 0.215 $2.15 https://www.digikey.com/product-detail/en/lite-on-inc/LTST-C171GKT/160-1423-1-ND/3867 $2.15
LTST-C171KSKT 10 $0.24 $2.44 https://www.digikey.com/product-detail/en/lite-on-inc/LTST-C171KSKT/160-1428-1-ND/386 $2.44
ESR10EZPJ221 10 $0.08 $0.83 https://www.digikey.com/product-detail/en/rohm-semiconductor/ESR10EZPJ221/RHM220K $0.83
Shipping 1 $4.10 $0.61 $4.71
Miscellaneous Hardware for 3D printer prototype 1 $6.67 $6.67 $0.00 n/a $6.67
Black PLA Filament 2 $19.99 $39.98 $2.50 https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00J0ECR5I/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_asin_title_o00__o00_ $42.48
ML5215 3 $45.14 $135.42 $0.00 https://www.aliexpress.com/item/Freeshipping-GARTT-ML5215-340KV-Brushless-Motor-Fo $135.42
91239A144 91239A230 90576A103 90576A104 93625A102 91239A755 8975K579 1 $10.16 $10.16 https://www.mcmaster.com/91239a144 $10.16
1 $12.63 $12.63 https://www.mcmaster.com/91239a230 $12.63
1 $4.18 $4.18 https://www.mcmaster.com/90576a103 $4.18
1 $4.50 $4.50 https://www.mcmaster.com/90576a104 $4.50
1 $10.25 $10.25 https://www.mcmaster.com/93625a102 $10.25
1 $8.21 $8.21 https://www.mcmaster.com/91239a755 $8.21
1 $4.42 $4.42 https://www.mcmaster.com/8975k579 $4.42
Shipping 1 $14.36 $14.36 $14.36
B0748ZY323 1 $99.00 $99.00 $7.24 https://www.amazon.com/VIVE-Virtual-Reality-System-Tracker-pc/dp/B0748ZY323/ref=asc $106.24
91595A179 8943K116 57485K67 91239A140 94180A361 90695A035 1 $8.06 $8.06 https://www.mcmaster.com/91595a179 $8.06
1 $17.92 $17.92 https://www.mcmaster.com/8943k116 $17.92
1 $2.32 $2.32 https://www.mcmaster.com/57485k67 $2.32
1 $10.16 $10.16 https://www.mcmaster.com/91239a140 $10.16
1 $12.00 $12.00 https://www.mcmaster.com/94180a361 $12.00
1 $2.15 $2.15 https://www.mcmaster.com/90695a035 $2.15
Shipping + tax 1 $11.38 $11.38 $11.38
91545a470 91239A753 91239A111 91290A109 90695A031 94180A321 94180A333 1 $3.44 $3.44 https://www.mcmaster.com/91545a470 $3.44
1 $8.77 $8.77 https://www.mcmaster.com/91239a753 $8.77
1 $7.38 $7.38 https://www.mcmaster.com/91239a111 $7.38
1 $10.01 $10.01 https://www.mcmaster.com/91290a109 $10.01
1 $7.34 $7.34 https://www.mcmaster.com/90695a031 $7.34
1 $10.82 $10.82 https://www.mcmaster.com/94180a321 $10.82
1 $16.15 $16.15 https://www.mcmaster.com/94180a333 $16.15
Shipping 1 $6.73 $6.73 $6.73
91255A540 91239A224 1 $9.14 $9.14 https://www.mcmaster.com/91255a540 $9.14
1 $8.51 $8.51 https://www.mcmaster.com/91239a224 $8.51
Shipping 1 $6.71 $6.71 $6.71
MP Select Plus Build Sheet Bed 200x200mm 2 $17.98 $35.96 $2.24 https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B07GGR5NMH/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_asin_title_o00_s00? $38.20
MK10 M7 0.4mm Extruder Nozzle Brass 1 $5.99 $5.99 https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B01KJSD6N0/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_asin_title_o01_s00?i $5.99
MK10 Nozzles M7 0.4mm Threaded Stainless Steel Nozzle 1 $5.99 $5.99 https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B01GG1F006/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_asin_title_o01_s00?i $5.99
AVAWO AW1434 1 $18.96 $18.96 https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0146IAXYO/ref=ppx_od_dt_b_asin_title_s00?ie=UT $18.96
BNTECHGO SW14A400008-P 1 $13.98 $13.98 https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B01N12J8I6/ref=ppx_od_dt_b_asin_title_s00?ie=UTF $13.98
H3S16AWG 1 $9.99 $9.99 https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B00LDYBA8I/ref=ppx_yo_dt_b_asin_title_o01_s00?ie $9.99
91239A755 2 8.21 16.42 7.88 24.3
lowerPuckCover 1 11.17 11.17 11.17
lowerArmSensorCover 1 $18.38 $18.38 $18.38
beltClampCover 1 $0.60 $0.60 $0.60
motorMount1 1 $7.60 $7.60 $7.60
14292020 1 $7.59 $7.59 $0.47 $8.06
31
32